REVIEW Genetic basis and detection of unintended effects in genetically modiﬁed crop plants Gregory S. Ladics Andrew Bartholomaeus Phil Bregitzer Nancy G. Doerrer Alan Gray Thomas Holzhauser Mark Jordan Paul Keese Esther Kok Phil Macdonald Wayne Parrott Laura Privalle Alan Raybould Seung Yon Rhee Elena Rice Jo rg Romeis Justin Vaughn Jean Michel Wal Kevin Glenn Received 18 January 2015 Accepted 14 February 2015 Published online 26 February 2015 C211The Author s 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com Abstract In January 2014, an international meeting sponsored by the International Life Sciences Institute Health and Environmental Sciences Institute and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency titled Genetic Basis of Unintended Effects in Modiﬁed Plants was held in Ottawa, Canada, bringing together over 75 scientists from academia, government, and the agro biotech industry. The objectives of the meeting wereto explore current knowledge and identify areas re quiring further study on unintended effects in plants and to discuss how this information can inform and improve genetically modiﬁed GM crop risk assess ments. The meeting featured presentations on the molecular basis of plant genome variability in general, unintended changes at the molecular and phenotypic levels, and the development and use of hypothesis driven evaluations of unintended effects in assessing conventional and GM crops. The development and role of emerging omics technologies in the assess ment of unintended effects was also discussed. SeveralElectronic supplementary material The online version of this article doi 10.1007 s11248 015 9867 7 contains supple mentary material, which is available to authorized users. G. S. Ladics DuPont Pioneer Agricultural Biotechnology, DuPont Experimental Station, 200 Powder Mill Road, Wilmington, DE 19803, USA A. Bartholomaeus Therapeutics Research Centre, School of Medicine, Queensland University, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia A. Bartholomaeus Faculty of Health, School of Pharmacy, University of Canberra, Locked Bag 1, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia P. Bregitzer National Small Grains Germplasm Research Facility, US Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, 1691 S. 2700 W., Aberdeen, ID 83210, USA N. G. Doerrer ILSI Health and Environmental Sciences Institute, 1156 15th St., NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20005, USA e mail ndoerrer hesiglobal.orgA. Gray Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, CEH Wallingford, Crowmarsh Gifford, Wallingford, Oxfordshire OX10 8BB, UK T. Holzhauser Division of Allergology, Paul Ehrlich Institut, Paul Ehrlich Strasse 51 59, 63225 Langen, Germany M. Jordan Cereal Research Centre, Agriculture and Agri Food Canada, 101 Route 100, Morden, MB R6M 1Y5, Canada P. Keese Ofﬁce of the Gene Technology Regulator, Australian Government, MDP54, GPO Box 9848, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia E. Kok RIKILT Wageningen UR, P.O. Box 230, 6700 AE Wageningen, The Netherlands 123Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 DOI 10.1007 s11248 015 9867 7themes recurred in a number of talks for example, a common observation was that no system for geneticmodiﬁcation, including conventional methods of plant breeding, is without unintended effects. Another common observation was that unintended does notnecessarily mean harmful . This paper summarizes key points from the information presented at the meeting to provide readers with current viewpoints onthese topics. Keywords Unintended effects C1GM crop plants C1 Environmental risk assessment C1Allergenicity C1 Toxicity Introduction As genetically modiﬁed GM crops worthy of com mercialization became available, procedures were in stituted to ensure that these plants were as safe for food, feed, and environmental release as their con ventional non GM counterparts. These procedures addressed two broad categories of changes that could be considered in a GM crop safety assessment in tended and unintended. The intended change in a new GM product is the desired phenotype brought about by the introduced transgene. Because many transgenesexpress a known and characterized protein, procedurescan be developed that directly assess the protein for toxicity and allergenicity and measure levels of metabolites that may be associated with the protein s function. Unintended changes, on the other hand,could materialize as a consequence of gene insertion, from random mutations that take place during the transformation and tissue culture process, or frompleiotropic effects of the introduced protein, and there is no single direct test for them. In January 2014, an international meeting spon sored by the International Life Sciences Institute Health and Environmental Sciences Institute and theCanadian Food Inspection Agency titled Genetic Basis of Unintended Effects in Modiﬁed Plants was held in Ottawa, Canada, bringing together over 75scientists from academia, government, and the agro biotech industry. The objectives of the meeting were to explore current knowledge and identify areas re quiring further study on unintended effects in plants and to discuss how this information can inform and improve GM crop risk assessments. The potential for an unintended effect to present a food or feed hazard is currently assessed through composi tional analyses and agronomic studies to compare the GMcrop with a genetically simila r conventional counterpart. Some regulatory authorities, such as those in the Euro pean Union EC 2013 , may also require animal feeding tests. Some aspects of testing for unintended effects seem P. Macdonald Canadian Food Inspection Agency, 1400 Merivale Rd, Ottawa, ON K1A 0Y9, Canada W. Parrott Center for Applied Genetic Technologies, University of Georgia, 111 Riverbend Road, Athens, GA 30602, USA L. Privalle Bayer CropScience, 407 Davis Drive, Morrisville, NC 27560, USA A. Raybould Syngenta Ltd, Jealott s Hill International Research Centre,Bracknell RG42 6EY, UK Present Address A. RaybouldSyngenta Crop Protection AG, Schwarzwaldallee 215,4058 Basel, Switzerland S. Y. Rhee Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution forScience, 260 Panama St., Stanford, CA 94305, USAE. Rice Monsanto Company, 700 Chesterﬁeld Pkwy W., CC5A, Chesterﬁeld, MO 63017, USA J. Romeis Agroscope, Institute for Sustainability Sciences ISS, Reckenholzstr. 191, 8046 Zurich, Switzerland J. Vaughn University of Georgia, 111 Riverbend Road, Athens, GA 30602, USA J. M. Wal Dept. SVS, AgroParisTech, 16 rue Claude Bernard,75231 Paris, France K. Glenn Monsanto Company, 800 N. Lindbergh Blvd, U4NA,St. Louis, MO 63167, USA588 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123to be generally accepted, such as the use of related con ventional comparators. Never theless, many questions are still being discussed, for exam ple, whether it is sufﬁcient to limit testing for unintended effects to those subject to testable hypotheses, or whether and when the precau tionary principle requires a broader look for genomic changes via proﬁling methods. As noted during theopening presentation and by several other speakers, unintended is not synonymous with harmful e.g., NRC 2004 . This manuscript summarizes four broad areas dis cussed at the meeting the molecular changes associ ated with plant genetic variability, the types of unintended genomic changes in GM plants, the use of hypothesis driven evaluations of unintended effects,and the use of emerging technologies in the assess ment of unintended effects. This paper is based on the meeting presentations, with new and updated infor mation added where appropriate. For each section, the primary contributors are noted, but comments and edits from other authors have been included. The au thors individual papers in their entirety are available as Online Resource 1. Presentations and other infor mation from the meeting can be found at http www. hesiglobal.org i4a pages index.cfm?pageID 3654 . Molecular basis of plant genetic variability 1 High throughput sequencing and other genomic technologies have made it possible to evaluate the nature and extent of naturally occurring genomic changes in plants. These were extensively reviewed byWeber et al. 2012 , who noted the following Single nucleotide changes are common, with a background rate of seven new mutations per billion bp of DNA, or roughly seven new muta tions for every soybean Glycine max plant in every ﬁeld Ossowski et al. 2010 . Insertions from transposo n sc a nb ev e r yc o m m o na s well, with rates as high as 50 novel insertions per plantper generation reported in a variety of rice Oryza sativa Naito et al. 2006 . Transposon insertions are also very common in soybean Tian et al. 2012 . Plants create novel genes through transposon capture, whereby pieces of different genes areassembled in novel combinations reviewed in Weber et al. 2012 . There are genes that are present in different numbers or absent altogether in different indi viduals within a crop e.g., Lai et al. 2010 Lam et al. 2010 Potato Genome Consortium 2011 McHale et al. 2012 . Horizontal gene transfer is not uncommon, with pararetroviral double stranded DNA virus se quences being particularly abundant in the gen omes of crop plants e.g., Liu et al. 2012 Staginnus et al. 2007 . The effects of naturally occurring insertions are of particular interest because plant genetic engineering istypically mediated by the insertion of a modiﬁed T DNA sequence from Agrobacterium tumefaciens or other vector DNA sequences into the genome. Thisinsertion may potentially disrupt the function of native genes and can create rearrangements at the site of in sertion. Indeed, roughly half of T DNA insertionsexhibit less than 8 bp of ﬁller DNA at the junction site, while the other half contain larger additions, generally between 8 and 100 bp Forsbach et al.2003 . Short insertions, comparable to those seen at T DNA junctions, have been observed in induced double strand break experiments Lloyd et al. 2012 Vu et al. 2014 . Such insertion variation is common, even in closely related rice varieties, and reﬂects thefact that errors in double strand break repair are fre quent in natural and breeding populations Vaughn and Bennetzen 2014 . Thus, the ﬁller DNA ob served in T DNA insertions has a clear counterpart in naturally occurring DNA insertions. In summary, the view that only transgenes result in insertions, and that these have a unique ability to disrupt gene expression e.g., Fagan et al. 2014 i sn o t supported by the available data. Instead, plant gen omes are very dynamic and plastic, as predicted by Barbara McClintock 1984 in her Nobel address, and undergo frequent insertions and other rearrangements. Molecular basis of unintended effects in GM plants In addition to the potential for insertional effects of transgenes, other mechanisms such as somaclonalvariation and pleiotropy can contribute to unintended effects. 1Section based on presentations from Wayne Parrott and Justin Vaughn.Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 589 123Somaclonal variation2 Semi differentiated plant tissues cultured in vitro are critical for most plant transformation methods. In vitro culture induces genetic and epigenetic changes, ter med somaclonal variation SCV Larkin and Scow croft 1981 , that are another possible source of unintended variation. Although SCV is potentiallyuseful as a source of novel mutations, it is contrary to the objective of making limited, predictable changes as a result of transgene introduction. For example,signiﬁcant and negative changes have been noted in the agronomic performance and malting quality of tissue culture derived barley. Yield losses of 15 84 have been observed in non transgenic derivatives of transgenic plants, i.e., non transgenic segregants derived from heterozygous transgenic plants Bregit zer et al. 1998 . Although certain adjustments to the in vitro environment can reduce the severity of SCV, the most effective way to eliminate it in barley hasbeen to backcross transgenic plants to plants without any SCV such as the wild type parent used in making the original transgenic plant , with selectionat each generation based only on the presence of the transgene. For example, a single backcross to barley cultivar Conlon recovered the majority of yield losscaused by SCV in a group of transgenic Conlon derived lines. On average, the yield loss in the primary transgenic lines was 31 , compared with6 in the backcross derived lines Bregitzer and Dahleen 2008 . Pleiotropic effects of transgenes 3 Some unintended effects might be caused by pleiotropy, the effect of a single gene whether a native gene or a transgene on multiple traits Fagan et al. 2014 . When both positive and negative effects are caused by the same gene, it is referred to as an tagonistic pleiotropy. An example of antagonistic pleiotropy is the wheat Triticum aestivum gene Lr34 , which encodes an ABC transporter, a molecule in volved in the transport of metabolites across mem branes Krattinger et al. 2009 .Lr34 provides durable resistance to a number of wheat diseases however, italso causes premature senescence of the ﬂag leaf leaf tip necrosis that can reduce potential yield in the absence of disease. If the wheat Lr34 gene is moved into barley Hordeum vulgare , the negative effect becomes stronger and the plants exhibit stunted growth and sterility Risk et al. 2013 . One possible explanation is that wheat has regulatory mechanismsthat control the expression of the gene in a manner that minimizes its negative effects on the other hand, the barley lines tested were primary transgenic lines and had not undergone selection against SCV described in the previous section . The amount of leaf tip necrosisvaries among wheat genotypes, but plant breeders have selected lines that maximize the beneﬁt while reducing the negative effect of the gene. The samemay be possible in barley if the detrimental effects seen are due to somaclonal variation rather than to pleiotropy. Prediction of whether pleiotropy and therefore the possibility of unintended effects is likely to occur as the result of a transgene depends on knowledge of thebiochemical mechanism of the encoded protein. Genes affecting basic cellular functions that are needed by many traits such as ABC transporters are more likelyto be pleiotropic. Similarly, genes in which alternative splicing occurs in the pre mRNA or that encode a protein affecting multiple pathways e.g., transcriptionfactors or other regulatory proteins or molecules could potentially be pleiotropic. A gene s origin may also be an indicator of whether pleiotropy is likely to occur, but this is harder to pre dict. There could be more pleiotropy if the gene ori ginates from another species due to lack of regulatorycontrols e.g., expression of wheat Lr34 in barley or less pleiotropy due to lack of a pathway or function in the recipient species compared with the donor origi nal species. An example of this is the lack of antho cyanin production in transgenic tomato Lycopersicon esculentum fruit after the introduction of genes regulating ﬂavonol and anthocyanin production from maize Zea mays Bovy et al. 2002 . The tomato plants had increases in some ﬂavonols but no antho cyanin production because tomato lacks sufﬁcient expression of another gene required for anthocyanin production. Variation in regulatory mechanisms is notonly observed at the species level different geno types of the same species can have variation in regulatory mechanisms e.g., Schiessl et al. 2014 , which is one reason there is so much phenotypic and 2Section based on presentation by Phil Bregitzer. 3Section based on presentation by Mark Jordan.590 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123phenologic diversity in crop species. Without this type of diversity, selection during plant breeding would be less effective. Similarity between unintended effects in conventional plant breeding and biotechnology4 Plant breeders have successfully improved crop yieldsdespite having little or no information on the genes and gene networks that impact yield. In the case of maize, it is clear that improvements in grain yield have been associated with signiﬁcant changes in many other traits Tollenaar and Lee 2010 . Whereas in conventional plant breeding, the exact functions of the combined genes are mainly unknown, biotechnology enables theintroduction of speciﬁc genes with expected effects on endogenous pathways and phenotypes. Although crop plants derived from conventional plant breeding and GM differ in the level of molecular data required for commercialization, both conven tional breeding products and GM products undergo asimilar process of selection for intended characteris tics and elimination of undesirable phenotypes Pri valle et al. 2012 . While it is clear that unintended effects occur in any type of breeding program, in cluding conventional crossing Cellini et al. 2004 Kok et al. 2008 Schnell et al. 2015 , the discussion on the potential for unintended events tends to be focused on GM organisms. This similarity between the changes caused by biotechnology and conventional plant breeding is re ﬂected in the approach to regulation used in Canada. The Canadian regulatory scope covers plants devel oped to possess characteristics sufﬁciently different from those of the same or similar species, regardless of the method used. As a consequence of the product based regulatory approach, in Canada the regulated plant is referred to as a plant with a novel trait PNT . PNTs include GM crops as well as some produced bymore conventional breeding techniques. The approach is designed to take advantage of the knowledge, ex pertise, and regulatory framework that are alreadypresent in regulatory departments and agencies but applied to conventional products. It is also an ac knowledgment that the Canadian Government policyconsiders that PNT crops should be considered as anextension of conventional breeding techniques and that the focus of assessment should be on the novel trait rather than on how the trait was obtained. The GM product development process 5 The extensive vetting involved in the generation and selection of one or a few elite i.e., top performing events minimizes the likelihood of unsafe unintended effects associated with the GM crop products that are taken to commercialization. Many ideas, traits, and events are evaluated to identify an event for which it isworth seeking approval e.g., Phillips McDougall 2011 Privalle et al. 2012 . As noted earlier, this is not unlike the approach taken by breeders seeking to de velop a new and improved variety. For GM crops, as for those derived from conven tional breeding, the most important selection criterionis efﬁcacy performance i.e., does the trait impart the desired phenotype, meeting product speciﬁcations . In the case of GM crops, the next most important criteriaapplied in identifying the lead event are those related to the molecular characteristics of the event. The inserted DNA ideally should be present at a single locus and as asingle copy. There should be no vector backbone pre sent in the event and the insertion should not have disrupted an endogenous gene or created a chimericnovel fusion protein. There should be minimal locus rearrangement and the integrity of the gene cassette should have been preserved. Importantly, while noneof these parameters have been demonstrated to impact the safety of the crop, the consideration of these pa rameters is based on hypothetical, minimal probabilitypossibilities. Since most GM products require multiple approvals, the requirements from the strictest juris dictions dominate the event selection criteria. Once the elite event is identiﬁed, an extensive safety assessment is conducted that includes studies on the safety of the newly expressed protein, molecularcharacterization of the insert, impact of the insert on plant performance and composition, environmental impact, and wholesomeness of the crop SCBD 2000 Codex 2003 . The assessment includes phenotypic and agronomic comparison between the new plant variety and a genetically similar comparator that is already onthe market and considered as safe. GM foods are among 4Section based on presentations by Elena Rice, Esther Kok, and Phil Macdonald.5Section based on presentation by Laura Privalle.Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 591 123the most highly studied foods consumed, and the regis tration dossiers are scrutin ized by regulatory agencies around the world. To date, approval has not been withheld for any event based on an unintended effect. Hypothesis driven evaluation of unintended effects Approaches to risk assessment6 Risk is a combination of the seriousness and likelihood of a harmful effect following a course of action. Riskassessment characterizes the amount of risk associated with an activity. It contributes to making decisions about whether to undertake an activity, such as theimport, ﬁeld testing, or cultivation of a speciﬁc GM crop. Some authors have raised concern e.g., Craig et al. 2008 that the amount of data required for risk assessments of GM crops is increasing and becoming detrimental to decision making in many countries. Two possible approaches to risk assessment have been described. In the bucket approach Raybould 2011 , data on the properties of the GM crop are col lected in an untargeted manner, often termed proﬁling.Proﬁling could comprise measurements of the crop s gross phenotype, composition of key tissues, tran scriptome, proteome, metabolome, and so on. Bycomparing these proﬁles with those of a suitable conventional crop, the risk assessor is supposed to be able to identify changes, which in turn indicate thatthere may be changes in the GM crop that are poten tially harmful see Omics technologies below . There are several limitations to this approach. First, what to regard as harmful is deﬁned by policy it is not discovered in data Sarevitz 2004 Sanvido et al. 2012 . Second, even if harm is deﬁned, proﬁling will collect data that do not predict the seriousness or probability of harm following use of the GM crop. These data are thus irrelevant for risk assessment andmay impair decision making because they distract from data that are relevant. Furthermore, it is difﬁcult to interpret the effect of an altered metabolite in theabsence of a hypothesis. The second approach regards risk assessment as a hypothesis testing exercise. The risk assessor identi ﬁes those effects that would be regarded as harmful ifthey were to occur, based on relevant legislation or regulations Evans et al. 2006 , and builds scenarios comprising a series of events leading from the pro posed use of the particular GM crop to the identiﬁedharmful effects. These scenarios, or pathways to harm , allow the risk assessor to devise testable hy potheses about the likelihood, frequency, or magni tude of the events in the pathway. Data are collected to test these hypotheses and thereby characterize risk Raybould 2011 . A concern raised about the latter approach is that it represents a biased approach to assessment. Effectiverisk assessment does involve bias in that representative protection goals must be selected from among all the possible effects of using a GM crop. Limited resourcesare then targeted to test hypotheses about the prob ability and consequences of those effects. These will be strong tests of clear hypotheses, which, if corroborated,provide high conﬁdence in conclusions of low risk. Problem formulation in environmental risk assessment 7 Environmental risk assessment ERA for GM cropsdeals almost exclusively with the phenotype and considers all plant traits that may have been altered by the transformation, whether intended or unintended.Of particular interest are any unintended changes in traits that may make the GM plant more persistent or invasive weedy in either agricultural or naturalenvironments. These include changes in the properties of the seeds such as developmental rates, number, release from the plant shattering , dormancy, andgermination rates that are important in the regen eration niche of the plant s establishment and spread, and in those traits that affect the plant s competitive ness such as seedling vigor, plant height, growth rates, and resistance to pests and disease . The ﬁrst stage in problem formulation in an ERA is to identify a set of environmental protection goals derived from local, national, or international policy. These may be broadly stated e.g., the CartagenaProtocol or more speciﬁc laws, statutes, or even guidelines, but collectively they enable a risk assessor to identify those aspects of the environment that mustbe protected. These can sometimes be formally 6Section based on presentation by Alan Raybould.7Section based on presentation by Alan Gray.592 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123deﬁned in terms of assessment endpoints e.g., insect pollinator abundance , which are whatever will be measured to ascertain whether protection has been achieved as intended Paes de Andrade et al. 2014 . The second stage of problem formulation is to seek a link between the cultivation of the GM crop and the assessment endpoint that may result in harm i.e., thepathway to harm . For example, insect pollinators are likely to be harmed if the plant presents a hazard e.g., an insecticidal protein that negatively affects the insect to which the insect may be exposed. Steps along the path way to harm can be recast as risk hypotheses that can bevalidated or rejected from existing data, or by designing new experiments or trials where appropriate. For ex ample, validation of the hypothesis the insect is notharmed by the protein or the protein is not expressed in pollen allows a conﬁden t risk assessment without further experimentation. Wolt et al. 2010 d e s c r i b et h e process in detail and Raybould 2011 and earlier papers referred to therein give speciﬁc examples of formulating a n dt e s t i n gr i s kh y p o t h e s e s .G r a y 2012 and Tepfer et al. 2013 give practical examples of the use of problem formulation in ERA for GM crops. Evaluation of food and feed safety As mentioned earlier, the approach to food and feed safety described by the Codex Alimentarius Commis sion Codex 2003 is based on comparison of the GM crop to a conventional counterpart employing a weight of evidence approach. In this way, the assessment is focused on identiﬁcation of potential new hazards or changes in hazard levels in the GM product. Focus on plausible outcomes 8 For food and feed safety risk assessment of GM crops, it is necessary to exclude hypothetical, extreme, or scientiﬁcally implausible circumstances. Instead, thepurpose is to 1 identify practical, biologically plau sible outcomes based on the extensive data now available, and 2 to deﬁne the nature of the at riskgroup s to be addressed population or individual health risks , the type of hazard s of concern toxicological, dietary, immunological , and the risktime metric acute, sub chronic, or chronic .It is unlikely that systemically toxic proteins that are unrelated to the parent plant variety or to the function of the transgene will be produced de novo in a GM plant Weber et al. 2012 . The reason is that systemic toxicity of an ingested protein requires at least three highly speciﬁc structural characteris tics 1 resistance to digestion, 2 ligand speciﬁcityfor the gut uptake transporters, and 3 ligand re ceptor speciﬁcity for site and species speciﬁc re ceptor mediated toxicity Hammond et al. 2013 . A change in any one of these three characteristics is an implausible outcome from either conventional plantbreeding or gene transfer thus, the probability of having all three occur in the same plant is vanish ingly small. Similarly, the potential for randomgenome effects to modify existing non toxic proteins to create a toxic protein is also essentially zero Weber et al. 2012 . This prediction is evidenced by the current knowledge of conventional corn and other food crop varieties that have millions of sin gle nucleotide polymorphisms SNPs across geno types Tenaillon et al. 2001 , but have never resulted in a novel toxic protein in a food crop Steiner et al. 2013 . The de novo generation of the machinery necessary to produce a toxic secondary metabolite is also very unlikely. Such an event has not been observed in theextensive range of varieties produced by genetic ma nipulation in conventional and GM crop breeding over the past century. The reactivation of dormant path ways i.e., pathways present in an ancestor of the crop that are inactive in the modern variety has also never been observed and is implausible due to the accumu lation of mutations in non functional DNA, progres sively degrading any residual potential functionality Steiner et al. 2013 . As in conventional plant breeding, there are natural variations in the levels of compounds, including those of toxicological relevance, in crops developed throughmodern biotechnology. Examples of plausible mechanisms include the up and down regulation of pre existing endogenous plant toxins, increased de creased uptake of heavy metals from the soil or water e.g., Cd, As, Se , altered levels of nutrients or antinutrients associated with population health out comes, altered production of pesticide metabolites, altered levels of toxic substrates precursors due to blocking of an enzyme pathway, and altered release oravailability of endogenous toxins. 8Section based on presentation by Andrew Bartholomaeus.Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 593 123Assessment for changes in levels of existing allergens9 According to the European Union perspective on the assessment of the overall allergenicity of whole GM plants, in cases where the recipient species of a geneticmodiﬁcation is a known allergen, e.g., soybean the qualitative and quantitative composition of endoge nous allergens in the GM crop and its conventionalcounterpart should be compared Metcalfe et al. 1996 . The concentration of endogenous allergens within a plant species is highly variable, and thecomparative analysis should consider the inﬂuence of the cultivars and of the conditions of cultivation, harvest, storage, and processing on the expression ofallergens see Examples of natural variation in al lergens below . The European Food Safety Authority EFSA guidance and the European Commission EC regulation have recommended including key en dogenous allergens i.e., such as those listed in the OECD consensus documents in the comparativecompositional analysis of plant materials collected from controlled ﬁeld trials. This aims to assess whe ther the GM plant is more allergenic than its conven tional counterpart EFSA 2011 E C 2013 . As described by the EC, key allergens are well char acterized allergens that are relevant for public healthbecause of their allergenic potency and abundance. They are generally well conserved proteins with im portant metabolic and physiological functions in theplant, such as enzymes, defense proteins, or storage proteins. Any signiﬁcant change in key allergen levels could thus be directly related to the speciﬁc allergyrisk and could also indicate the possible occurrence of other types of unintended effects. Non targeted analyses, such as proteomic ap proaches using mass spectrometry e.g., matrix as sisted laser desorption ionization MALDI or electrospray ionization time of ﬂight mass spec trometry ESI TOF MS in combination with different separation methods such as 2 dimensional gel elec trophoresis or liquid chromatography , have beenrapidly developed Goodman et al. 2013 and can help to identify signiﬁcant changes in endogenous allergen expression. They may not require human sera and haveproven to be efﬁcient alternative tools for the iden tiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of known allergens in plants. However, such tests may sometimes be con sidered as complex and insufﬁciently standardized andneeding further developments and validation before they can be routinely used for safety assessment Fernandez et al. 2013 . Examples of natural variation in allergens 10 Allergies to fruits and vegetables affect up to 4 o f the population in Europe Zuidmeer et al. 2008 . Carrot Daucus carota and apple Malus domestica are among the most prevalent elicitors of allergic re actions to foods in northern and central Europe. Inapple, variation in patient reaction and or allergen levels has been observed among cultivars Bolhaar et al. 2005 , stored vs. unstored fruit Sancho et al. 2006a ,b , and patient geographical areas. Similarly, the carrot isoallergens related allergens from the same species Dau c 1.01 and Dau c 1.02 were quantiﬁedusing ELISA Foetisch et al. 2011 in two cultivars, Rodelica and Nerac , in a two year study. Initial evaluation of the ﬁeld data suggests a large inﬂuenceof the year of cultivation and an apparent difference between the two cultivars unpublished data, re search project BO L 03OE349 granted by the Ger man Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection . Furthermore, some isoaller gens might be more relevant than others for clinicalreactivity, and the level of allergens can increase or decrease depending on genetic and environmental factors. Studies on the allergenicity of apple andcarrot have focused on non transgenic cultivars however, they can be considered model foods to study the inﬂuence of genetic and environmentalfactors on the composition of panallergenic struc tures functionally related allergenic molecules found in different species and the isoallergen dis tribution in fruits and vegetables. Understanding the biochemical pathways of allergen synthesis and the range of natural variability may support hypothesis driven studies on unintended effects in GM plants intended for human consumption. 9Section based on presentation by Jean Michel Wal.10Section based on presentation by Thomas Holzhauser.594 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123Environmental risk assessment of GM crop plants Example of hypothesis driven testing drought tolerant maize11 The evaluation of Monsanto s recently introducedDroughtGard C210maize hybrids event MON 87460 was used as a case study to illustrate how hypothesis driven testing can be used for safety assessment. This product expresses a bacterial cold shock domain pro tein B Bacillus subtilis CSPB , which imparts re duced yield loss under water limited conditions compared with conventional corn Castiglioni et al. 2008 . CSPB is a member of the cold shock domain containing CSD containing protein family. Under environmental stress, CSD containing proteins mod erate stress responses in bacteria and plants, primarilythrough stabilization of RNA and improved cellular function Cristofari and Darlix 2002 Chaikam and Karlson 2008 . Like endogenous CSD proteins found in bacteria and plants, the CSPB protein in MON 87460 interacts with RNA and accumulates and lo calizes to rapidly growing tissues and in developingreproductive organs, thereby helping to maintain cel lular function in those tissues during stress Nemali et al. 2014 . Under water limited conditions, there is a trend toward improved ear growth rate for MON 87460 compared with the control plants, while the common mechanisms of plant response to droughtstress are not altered in transgenic CSPB expressing maize plants Castiglioni et al. 2008 Nemali et al. 2014 . When plants were grown under well watered conditions, no appreciable differences between CSPB expressing lines and the control were detected Cas tiglioni et al. 2008 . Based on the understanding of the CSPB mode of action, the ERA for MON 87460 included six hy pothesis driven studies that answered speciﬁc ques tions relevant to the nature of the trait, in addition to the standard phenotypic and agronomic ﬁeld trials in the presence and absence of the trait Sammons et al.2014 . The studies included assessments for persis tence outside of cultivation root growth and devel opment and drought, cold, heat, and salt tolerance Sammons et al. 2014 . No additional abiotic stress tolerances were identiﬁed and no differences inseason long water consumption or root growth and development were observed. These studies did not reveal any potential for adverse environmental impacts. Example of hypothesis driven testing assessment of potential for weediness 12 In Australia, previous experience on assessment ofweediness has been used to assess transgenic crops. Identiﬁcation of characteristics that are relevant to weediness invasiveness has been based on practicalexperience with more than 1200 major environmental and agricultural weeds in diverse landscapes Randall 2012 . Weed scientists have produced a robust and simple weed risk assessment protocol that can be readily applied to any plant Keese et al. 2014 . In addition, the large datasets available from weed riskassessments include plants across the whole risk spectrum and allow rigorous validation tests to be conducted Virtue et al. 2008 Stone and Byrne 2011 . The most advanced method for weed risk assess ment is based on the post border weed risk manage ment protocol Auld 2012 , which was developed as a means of prioritizing existing weeds for control. It can be adapted to risk assessment of GM plants Keese et al. 2014 by comparing the weed risk of the GM plant to that of the conventional counterpart. This approach is used to identify signiﬁcant changes based on three factors the risk context i.e., the environmentwhere the GM crop might be present , the ability of the GM plant to spread and persist, and the potential negative impacts on biodiversity, non target organ isms, soil nutrients, etc. The weed risk approach speciﬁes relevant charac teristics of GM plants that affect spread and persis tence invasiveness and those that potentially give rise to negative impacts on human or animal health, or the environment. These characteristics capture chan ges due to either intended or unintended effects. Changes that have no or negligible effect on weed risk need not be explored. The post border weed riskassessment approach therefore provides guidance on the data requirements, for both intended and unin tended traits, that are considered relevant for the ERAof a GM plant. 11Section based on presentation by Elena Rice.12Section based on presentation by Paul Keese.Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 595 123Unintended effects on non target organisms13 A common concern associated with the growing of GM crops is over their potential to have adverse im pacts on non target organisms. Arthropods in par ticular form a major part of the biodiversity in agricultural landscapes, and many are valued because they provide important ecosystem services, includingbiological control, pollination, and decomposition, or cultural services, including human enjoyment and education Sanvido et al. 2012 Garcia Alonso and Raybould 2014 . Therefore, potential impacts that GM plants may have on valued non target arthropods NTAs are addressed in ERA. Both the intended change e.g., production of a Bt Cry crystal protein for target insect control and any unintended changes could cause unintended effects onvalued non target organisms. Since consequences of the intended change can be anticipated, it is possible to construct conceptual models pathways to harm ofhow growing of the GM plant could harm valued NTAs and to formulate risk hypotheses that can sub sequently be tested Raybould 2011 . A common hy pothesis is that the stressor i.e., the Cry toxin does not reduce the abundance and ecological functions of NTAs under ﬁeld conditions. This hypothesis istypically tested within a tiered framework that moves from laboratory or early tier tests using species that are readily available, amenable to testing, and able todetect potential hazards, to more complex higher tier experiments that evaluate the risks under more real istic exposure conditions such as ﬁeld studies Romeiset al. 2008 . Laboratory studies termed tier 1 tests are particularly powerful for testing the risk hypothesis in cases where no adverse effects are detected underthese highly controlled laboratory and worst case ex posure conditions, a no effect conclusion can be drawn with high conﬁdence Raybould et al. 2007 Romeis et al. 2011 . In the case of unintended, plant transformation re lated effects, the assessment typically follows aweight of evidence approach taking into account in formation from the molecular characterization of the particular GM event and from comparisons of com position and agronomic and phenotypic characteristics of the GM plant with its conventional counterpart Garcia Alonso and Raybould 2014 . If differences are detected, their likely biological relevance will be assessed by considering the range of values known for the conventional crop varieties that have a history ofsafe use. The aim of this assessment is to identify potentially harmful unintended changes that, if found, would trigger a more detailed assessment Romeiset al. 2008 . This approach is considered sufﬁciently conservative given the fact that more than 99 of all transformation events are eliminated during prior agronomic and phenotypic analyses e.g., Phillips McDougall 2011 . It is sometimes argued that risk assessments should include experiments to study the impact of unintended, transformation related effects on non target organ isms. For example, the EFSA requests non target studies using GM plant material as a test substance to give indications on possible interactions between plant compounds and reﬂect realistic exposure con ditions through bioavailability EFSA 2010 . The justiﬁcation for these additional data is that the com positional analyses do not necessarily target speciﬁc metabolites known to be involved in non target or ganism plant relationships. This approach has manylimitations. For example, it is usually unknown which metabolites are involved in these interactions, and different metabolites are likely to affect different non target species differently. Furthermore it is more likely to detect differences in plant tissue composition among different plant varieties or even plant batchesthan between the tissue from GM plants and their non transformed control e.g., Meissle et al. 2014 . Such experiments and their results may thus add confusionrather than certainty to the ERA. The published lit erature on the non target impact of Bt maize, for ex ample, provides a number of examples where studiesusing GM plant tissue as a test substance have resulted in inconclusive results Romeis et al. 2013 . As a solution, the unintended, transformation re lated effects that might adversely affect NTAs should be identiﬁed during the problem formulation phase of the ERA taking into account the results from themolecular, phenotypic, and agronomic characteriza tion and the compositional analyses. If such charac teristics are identiﬁed as stressors of concern,pathways to harm can be constructed and testable risk hypotheses can be formulated. This is a precondition to design and execute meaningful studies that providedata to support the ERA. 13Section based on presentation by Jo rg Romeis.596 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123Emerging technologies and application to assessment of unintended effects Omics technologies14 In contrast to the rationale described above suggesting that a hypothesis driven approach is sufﬁciently in formative for risk assessments, there are calls for the use of global proﬁling technologies to survey the plant more broadly than is currently feasible using a targetedapproach. As previously noted, unintended effects can be found in both conventional and GM based breeding programs Kok et al. 2008 Weber et al. 2012 Flint Garcia 2013 . New plant breeding programs are moving toward a broader range of molecular biologi cal breeding techniques to achieve more complexgenetic alterations within the framework of shorter breeding programs Lusser et al. 2011 . In the future, other strategies that aim for even more profoundchanges, such as strategies based on synthetic biology, may be applied to plant breeding. For these reasons, it is useful to have more infor mative and cost efﬁcient analytical methods to screen for unintended, potentially adverse, effects. Omics technologies may meet these criteria. Omics technolo gies, whether transcriptomics mRNA proﬁling , pro teomics protein proﬁling or metabolomics metabolite proﬁling , have already shown their added value in different areas Tanaka 2010 d eL i g te ta l . 2012 R a u c h et al. 2012 . In plant materials, these methodologies can be applied in a reproducible and informative way Fernie and Schauer 2009 Van Dijk et al. 2010 ,2012 Oms Oliu et al. 2013 . Such studies have conﬁrmed that differences between a single trait transgenic plant va riety and its conventional counterpart will typically be smaller than differences between comparable conven tional varieties for the analytes and time points examined. New plant varieties could be screened for any aberrant omics proﬁle, i.e., a proﬁle that is different from theproﬁles of plant varieties considered as safe. New plant varieties for which compositional proﬁles fall within the range of proﬁles derived from plant varieties alreadyconsidered safe would not require further assessment. This would not mean that a plant with an altered proﬁle is not safe, but in the case of a proﬁle outside the range ofvarieties considered as safe, a further detailed analysis ofthe new plant variety would be required to conﬁrm its safety. This approach complements current approaches for targeted compositional ana lyses, but the information content of omics technologies will be much greater.Statistical and chemometric methods are available to rapidly screen proﬁles of new plant varieties with ref erence to proﬁles from plant va rieties that we consider as safe Van Dijk et al. 2014 . To effectively implement omics technologies to improve current risk assessment procedures, it is necessary to establish simple, common protocols for omics analyses and related data analyses with the aim to 1 compare the new plant inbred orvariety to an appropriate comparator e.g., in the case of a GM crop, a conventional counterpart and 2 compare the new plant inbred or variety to a larger set of geno types of the same species that are considered safe. This approach will often relate to data that the plant breeder will already have available, thus considerably reducing the regulatory burden for plant breeders while safe guarding the food supply in the future. Genome scale metabolic networks and metabolomics 15 As suggested above, omics technologies have the po tential for enabling comprehensive and quantitative assessment of metabolic changes in response to ge netic modiﬁcation. While non targeted metabolite proﬁling can detect thousands of compounds, it is not easy to understand the signiﬁcance of the changedmetabolites in the biochemical and biological context of the organism. To derive biochemical explanations or hypotheses for the observed metabolite changesfrom non targeted metabolomics studies, it is impor tant to examine the changed metabolites in the context of a genome scale metabolic network of the organism. Much progress has been made in the last few dec ades to represent metabolism at a genome scale Thiele and Palsson 2010 . The advances in genome sequencing and emerging ﬁelds such as biocuration biological database management and bioinformatics enabled the reconstruction of genome scale metabolicnetworks for model organisms Bassel et al. 2012 . Genome scale metabolic networks have been pre dicted from reference metabolic pathway databasessuch as MetaCyc Caspi et al. 2012 , PlantCyc Zhang 14Section based on presentation by Esther Kok.15Section based on presentation by Seung Yon Rhee.Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 597 123et al. 2010 , and KEGG Kanehisa et al. 2012 . These genome scale metabolic networks are now available for several plant species such as Arabidopsis thaliana Mueller et al. 2003 Zhang et al. 2010 , poplar Populus trichocarpa Zhang et al. 2010 ,Chlamy domonas reinhardtii May et al. 2009 , medic Med icago truncatula Urbanczyk Wochniak and Sumner 2007 , grasses Youens Clark et al. 2011 , and night shade plants Bombarely et al. 2011 . The genome scale metabolic networks can be used to create predictive metabolic models Sweetlove et al. 2008 . Metabolic models can be used to predict metabolic ﬂuxes under a variety of scenarios such as genetic perturbations Feist and Palsson 2008 . Two types of metabolic models have been used kinetic andstoichiometric. Kinetic modeling uses enzyme kinet ics to numerically simulate and test metabolic ﬂuxes and can explain the mechanism of ﬂux changes, butthe difﬁculty of determining in vivo enzyme kinetics has limited this modeling to a small number of path ways. The other modeling approach uses the stoi chiometry of reactants and products in reactions to solve for the most likely ﬂuxes with added constraints based on thermodynamics, directionality, and ﬂuxcapacity of reactions Thiele and Palsson 2010 . This approach has been used to build genome scale metabolic models of several plant species such asArabidopsis Poolman et al. 2009 de Oliveira Dal Molin et al. 2010 , maize Saha et al. 2011 , and C. reinhardtii Chang et al. 2011 . Most of these models have not been validated extensively using ﬂux mea surements, though advances in metabolic ﬂux analysis using 13C labeling and metabolomics approaches hold promise Schwender 2008 Sweetlove et al. 2008 Allen et al. 2009 . These metabolic models have been applied in a variety of studies ranging from metabolic engineering, drug discovery, drug target discovery, identiﬁcation of novel gene function, evolutionary processes, networkbehaviors, and interpretations of mutant phenotypes Feist and Palsson 2008 . The most common algorithm used in these studies has been ﬂux balance analysis FBA , which attempts to balance the stoichiometry of the metabolites within the metabolic network with a goal objective function of maximal growth rate ormaximal biomass accumulation. While ﬂux predic tions from FBA match experimental data reasonably well Burgard and Maranas 2003 , its assumptions may not always hold true, especially for GM or mutantlines. Several algorithms that have the goal of minimizing the change in the metabolic network upon perturbation have been developed, and appear to per form better than FBA in explaining ﬂuxes of mutants Segre et al. 2002 Shlomi et al. 2005 Herrga rd et al. 2006 . This type of modeling could point to bio chemical explanations for unintended or unexpectedmetabolite changes, which could help devise hy pothesis driven assessment strategies. Using the genome scale metabolic network of Ara bidopsis, Rhee and colleagues tested the effect of single genetic perturbations of 136 genes 129 knock out and 7overexpression lines by comprehensively proﬁling the metabolites using 11 analytic platforms including GC MS, LC MS, and ESI Quanbeck et al. 2012 . Com parison of the metabolite proﬁles across the mutants showed that metabolic networks were robust to pertur bations of single metabolic genes and the genetic per turbations changed the network more locally than globally Kim and Rhee, unpub lished results . This study revealed relationships betw een characteristics of the perturbed genes and metabolic changes. More analyses of this type would help in identifying the relationships between changed metabolite s and their potential impact on the metabolic system and biology of the organism, which in turn would inform if altered composition could have toxic or other harmful effects for food and feedsafety in any given crop. Conclusions The meeting summarized here was intended to present and discuss a broad range of viewpoints, rather than to arrive at a consensus on particular points. Neverthe less, several themes recurred in a number of presen tations. For example, there seemed to be little disagreement with the observation that no system for genetic modiﬁcation, including conventional methodsof plant breeding, is without unintended effects. It was also commonly observed that unintended is not synonymous with harmful . The testing methodsused to identify unintended effects from transgene introduction are based on analyzing the agronomic performance of the crop and composition of the har vested parts e.g., grain, fruit, or forage . This testing, in combination with hypothesis based testing of the effects and potential safety issues associated withtransgene expression minimizes the likelihood of598 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123unsafe unintended effects associated with the GM crop products that are taken to commercialization. The types of changes, such as genomic disruption caused by trans gene insertion, that were once seen ascapable of leading to the production of unintended ef fects e.g., in the form of novel toxins Kessler et al. 1992 turn out to be routine occurrences during all types of plant breeding and are ubiquitous in crop plants. De spite the ongoing presence of these changes during plant breeding and selection, there is not a single documented example whereby these changes have led to the pro duction of previously unknown toxins. All reported casesof crop toxicity have been a ssociated with the inadver tent elevation of known toxins , such that testing for their presence has become a part of the breeding process insome crops to prevent inadvertent increases in toxin levels Steiner et al. 2013 . Emerging tools and resour ces such as genome scale metabolic networks, quantitative network modeling, and metabolomics may help assess the effects of genetic modiﬁcation on metabolism a nd may facilitate rational assessment of potential uni ntended effects of genetic modiﬁcation on metabolism. The uses of networks and other omics based technolog ies are still under assess ment and are viewed as possible means of identifying potential unintended effects not tested by targeted ap proaches. As discussed during the meeting, there is notyet agreement as to whether the analytical and statistical methods currently available are sufﬁcient to determine whether the proﬁle of a new variety is meaningfullydifferent either globally or i n the behavior of individual data points from those of existing varieties. Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge all speakers and participants for their contributions to the January 2014 meeting in Ottawa, Canada, on the Genetic Basis of Unin tended Effects in Modiﬁed Plants . The authors also acknowledge the expert technical assistance of Virginia M. Peschke Oakside Editorial Services in the preparation of this paper. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author s and the source are credited. References Allen DK, Libourel IG, Shachar Hill Y 2009 Metabolic ﬂux analysis in plants coping with complexity. Plant CellEnviron 32 1241 1257Auld B 2012 An overview of pre border weed risk assessment and post border weed risk management protocols. Plant Prot Q 7 105 111 Bassel GW, Gaudinier A, Brady SM, Hennig L, Rhee SY, Smet ID 2012 Systems analysis of plant functional, transcrip tional, physical interaction, and metabolic networks. PlantCell 24 3859 3875 Bolhaar ST, van de Weg WE, van Ree R, Gonzalez Mancebo E, Zuidmeer L, Bruijnzeel Koomen CA, Fernandez Rivas M, Jansen J, Hoffmann Sommergruber K, Knulst AC, GilissenLJ 2005 In vivo assessment with prick to prick testingand double blind, placebo controlled food challenge of allergenicity of apple cultivars. J Allergy Clin Immunol 116 1080 1086 Bombarely A, Menda N, Tecle IY, Buels RM, Strickler S, Fischer York T, Pujar A, Leto J, Gosselin J, Mueller LA 2011 The Sol Genomics Network solgenomics.net growing tomatoes using Perl. Nucleic Acids Res 39 Data base issue D1149 D1155 Bovy A, de Vos R, Kemper M, Schijlen E, Pertejo MA, Muir S, Collins G, Robinson S, Verhoeyen M, Hughes S, Santos Buelga C, van Tunen A 2002 High ﬂavonol tomatoesresulting from the heterologous expression of the maize transcription factor genes LC and C1. Plant Cell 14 2509 2526 Bregitzer P, Dahleen LS 2008 A single backcross effectively eliminates agronomic and quality alterations caused by somaclonal variation in barley. Crop Sci 48 471 479 Bregitzer P, Halbert SE, Lemaux PG 1998 Somaclonal variation in the progeny of transgenic barley. Theor Appl Genet 96 421 425 Burgard AP, Maranas CD 2003 Optimization based frame work for inferring and testing hypothesized metabolicobjective functions. Biotechnol Bioeng 82 670 677 Caspi R, Altman T, Dreher K, Fulcher CA, Subhraveti P, Keseler IM, Kothari A, Krummenacker M, Latendresse M,Mueller LA, Ong Q, Paley S, Pujar A, Shearer AG, TraversM, Weerasinghe D, Zhang P, Karp PD 2012 The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes and the BioCyc collection of pathway genome databases.Nucleic Acids Res 40 Database issue D742 D753 Castiglioni P, Warner D, Bensen RJ, Anstrom DC, Harrison J, Stoecker M, Abad M, Kumar G, Salvador S, D Ordine R, Navarro S, Back S, Fernandes M, Targolli J, Dasgupta S,Bonin C, Luethy MH, Heard JE 2008 Bacterial RNA chaperones confer abiotic stress tolerance in plants and improved grain yield in maize under water limited condi tions. Plant Physiol 147 446 455 Cellini F, Chesson A, Colquhoun I, Constable A, Davies HV, Engel KH, Gatehouse AM, Ka renlampi S, Kok EJ, Leguay JJ, Lehesranta S, Noteborn HP, Pedersen J, Smith M 2004 Unintended effects and their detection in geneticallymodiﬁed crops. Food Chem Toxicol 42 1089 1125 Chaikam V, Karlson D 2008 Functional characterization of two cold shock domain proteins from Oryza sativa . Plant Cell Environ 31 995 1006 Chang RL, Ghamsari L, Manichaikul A, Hom EF, Balaji S, Fu W, Shen Y, Hao T, Palsson BØ, Salehi Ashtiani K, PapinJA 2011 Metabolic network reconstruction of Chlamy domonas offers insight into light driven algal metabolism. Mol Syst Biol 7 518Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 599 123Codex Alimentarius 2003 Guideline for the conduct of food safety assessment of foods derived from recombinant DNA plants. CAC GL 45 2003 Craig W, Tepfer M, Degrassi G, Ripandelli D 2008 An overview of general features of risk assessments of genetically modiﬁed crops. Euphytica 164 853 860 Cristofari G, Darlix JL 2002 The ubiquitous nature of RNA chaperone proteins. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 72 223 268 de Ligt J, Willemsen MH, van Bon BW, Kleefstra T, Yntema HG, Kroes T, Vulto van Silfhout AT, Koolen DA, de VriesP, Gilissen C, del Rosario M, Hoischen A, Scheffer H, de Vries BB, Brunner HG, Veltman JA, Vissers LE 2012 Diagnostic exome sequencing in persons with severeintellectual disability. N Engl J Med 367 1921 1929 de Oliveira Dal Molin CG, Quek LE, Palfreyman RW, Brumbley SM, Nielsen LK 2010 AraGEM, a genome scale reconstruction of the primary metabolic network inArabidopsis. Plant Physiol 152 579 589 EC 2013 Commission Implementing Regulation EU No 503 2013 of 3 April 2013 on applications for authorisationof genetically modiﬁed food and feed in accordance withRegulation EC No 1829 2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council and amending Commission Regulations EC No 641 2004 and EC No 1981 2006. Off J EurUnion L157 1 48 EFSA 2010 Guidance on the environmental risk assessment of genetically modiﬁed plants. EFSA J 8 1879 EFSA 2011 EFSA Panel on Genetically Modiﬁed Organisms GMO . Guidance for risk assessment of food and feed from genetically modiﬁed plants. EFSA J 9 2150 Evans J, Wood G, Miller M 2006 The risk assessment policy gap an example from the UK contaminated land regime.Environ Int 32 1066 1071 Fagan J, Antoniou M, Robinson C 2014 GMO Myths and Truths, 2nd ed. Earth Open Source, London. http www.earth opensource.org index.php reports gmo myths and truths Feist AM, Palsson BØ 2008 The growing scope of applications of genome scale metabolic reconstructions using Escher ichia coli . Nat Biotechnol 26 659 667 Fernandez A, Mills ENC, Lovik M, Spoek A, Germini A, Mikalsen A, Wal JM 2013 Endogenous allergens and compositional analysis in the allergenicity assessment of genetically modiﬁed plants. Food Chem Toxicol 62 1 6 Fernie AR, Schauer N 2009 Metabolomics assisted breeding a viable option for crop improvement? Trends Genet 25 39 48 Flint Garcia SA 2013 Genetics and consequences of crop domestication. J Agric Food Chem 61 8267 8276 Foetisch K, Dahl L, Jansen B, Becker WM, Lidholm J, van Ree R, Broll H, Kaul S, Vieths S, Holzhauser T 2011 Development and in house validation of allergen speciﬁcELISA tests for the quantiﬁcation of Dau c 1.01, Dau c 1.02and Dau c 4 in carrot extracts Daucus carota . Anal Bioanal Chem 399 935 943 Forsbach A, Schubert D, Lechtenberg B, Gils M, Schmidt R 2003 A comprehensive characterization of single copy T DNA insertions in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome. Plant Mol Biol 52 161 176 Garcia Alonso M, Raybould A 2014 Protection goals in environmental risk assessment a practical approach. Transgenic Res 23 945 956Goodman RE, Panda R, Ariyarathna H 2013 Evaluation of endogenous allergens for the safety evaluation of ge netically engineered food crops review of potential risks,test methods, examples and relevance. J Agric Food Chem 61 8317 8332 Gray A 2012 Problem formulation in environmental risk assessment for genetically modiﬁed crops a practitioner sapproach. Colln Biosaf Rev 6 10 65 Hammond B, Kough J, Herouet Guicheney C, Jez JM 2013 Toxicological evaluation of proteins introduced into foodcrops. Crit Rev Toxicol 43 Suppl 2 25 42 Herrga rd MJ, Fong SS, Palsson BØ 2006 Identiﬁcation of genome scale metabolic network models using experimen tally measured ﬂux proﬁles. PLoS Comput Biol 2 7 e72 Kanehisa M, Goto S, Sato Y, Furumichi M, Tanabe M 2012 KEGG for integration and interpretation of large scale molecular data sets. Nucleic Acids Res 40 Database issue D109 D114 Keese PK, Robold AV, Myers RC, Weisman S, Smith J 2014 Applying a weed risk assessment approach to GM crops. Transgenic Res 23 957 969 Kessler DA, Taylor MR, Maryanski JH, Flamm EL, Kahl LS 1992 The safety of foods developed by biotechnology. Science 256 1747 1749 Kok EJ, Keijer J, Kleter GA, Kuiper HA 2008 Comparative safety assessment of plant derived foods. Regul ToxicolPharmacol 50 98 113 Krattinger SG, Lagudah ES, Spielmeyer W, Singh RP, Huerta Espino J, McFadden H, Bossolini E, Selter LL, Keller B 2009 A putative ABC transporter confers durable resis tance to multiple fungal pathogens in wheat. Science 323 1360 1363 Lai J, Li R, Xu X, Jin W, Xu M, Zhao H, Xiang Z, Song W, Ying K, Zhang M, Jiao Y, Ni P, Zhang J, Li D, Guo X, Ye K, Jian M, Wang B, Zheng H, Liang H, Zhang X, Wang S, Chen S, Li J, Fu Y, Springer NM, Yang H, Wang J, Dai J, SchnablePS, Wang J 2010 Genome wide patterns of geneticvariation among elite maize inbred lines. Nat Genet 42 1027 1030 Lam HM, Xu X, Liu X, Chen W, Yang G, Wong FL, Li MW, He W, Qin N, Wang B, Li J, Jian M, Wang J, Shao G, Wang J,Sun SS, Zhang G 2010 Resequencing of 31 wild and cultivated soybean genomes identiﬁes patterns of genetic diversity and selection. Nat Genet 42 1053 1059 Larkin PJ, Scowcroft WR 1981 Somaclonal variation a novel source of variability from cell cultures for plant improve ment. Theor Appl Genet 60 197 214 Liu R, Koyanagi KO, Chen S, Kishima Y 2012 Evolutionary force of AT rich repeats to trap genomic and episomal DNAs into the rice genome lessons from endogenous pararetrovirus. Plant J 72 817 828 Lloyd AH, Wang D, Timmis JN 2012 Single molecule PCR reveals similar patterns of non homologous DSB repair in tobacco and Arabidopsis . PLoS One 7 e32255 Lusser M, Parisi C, Plan D, Rodrı guez Cerezo E 2011 New plant breeding techniques state of the art and prospects for commercial development. IPTS report, JRC 63971, EUR 24760 EN. doi 10.2791 54761 . Accessed 20 Oct 2014 May P, Christian JO, Kempa S, Walther D 2009 ChlamyCyc an integrative systems biology database and web portal for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . BMC Genomics 10 209600 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123McClintock B 1984 The signiﬁcance of responses of the genome to challenge. Science 226 792 801 McHale LK, Haun WJ, Xu WW, Bhaskar PB, Anderson JE, Hyten DL, Gerhardt DJ, Jeddeloh JA, Stupar RM 2012 Structural variants in the soybean genome localize to clusters of biotic stress response genes. Plant Physiol159 1295 1308 Meissle M, Zu nd J, Waldburger M, Romeis J 2014 Develop ment of Chrysoperla carnea Stephens Neuroptera Chrysopidae on pollen from Bt transgenic and conven tional maize. Sci Rep 4 5900 Metcalfe DD, Astwood JD, Townsend R, Sampson HA, Taylor SL, Fuchs RL 1996 Assessment of the allergenic potential of foods derived from genetically engineered crop plants. CritRev Food Sci Nutr 36 S165 S186 Mueller LA, Zhang P, Rhee SY 2003 AraCyc a biochemical pathway database for Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 132 453 460 Naito K, Cho E, Yang G, Campbell MA, Yano K, Okumoto Y, Tanisaka T, Wessler SR 2006 Dramatic ampliﬁcation of a rice transposable element during recent domestication.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 47 17620 17625 Nemali KS, Bonin C, Dohleman FG, Stephens M, Reeves WR, Nelson DE, Whitsel JE, Sammons B, Silady RA, Anstrom D, Sharp RE, Patharkar OR, Clay D, Cofﬁn M, NemethMA, Leibman ME, Luethy M, Lawson M 2014 Physio logical responses related to increased grain yield under drought in the ﬁrst biotechnology derived drought tolerant maize. Plant Cell Environ. doi 10.1111 pce.12446 NRC 2004 Safety of genetically engineered foods approaches to assessing unintended health effects. Chapter 3. Unin tended effects from breeding, pp 39 71. Committee onIdentifying and Assessing Unintended Effects of Ge netically Engineered Foods on Human Health, National Research Council. National Academies Press, Washington Oms Oliu G, Odriozola Serrano I, Martı n Belloso O 2013 Metabolomics for assessing safety and quality of plant derived food. Food Res Int 54 1172 1183 Ossowski S, Schneeberger K, Lucas Lledo JI, Warthmann N, Clark RM, Shaw RG, Weigel D, Lynch M 2010 The rateand molecular spectrum of spontaneous mutations inArabidopsis thaliana . Science 327 92 94 Paes de Andrade P, Parrott W, Mercedes Roca M 2014 Genetically modiﬁed organisms environmental riskassessment guide, 2nd edn. ILSI Brasil. http www.ilsi. org Brasil Pages ViewItemDetails.aspx?WebId C34AB3 F5 C89B 49B3 9740 31F407A2A6FD ListId 91D4243D A11D 4CB9 B694 551373D9E8C5 ItemID 73 . Accessed 14 Aug 2014 Phillips McDougall 2011 The cost and time involved in the discovery, development and authorisation of a new plantbiotechnology derived trait. http croplife.org plant bio technology regulatory 2 cost of bringing a biotech crop to market . Accessed 14 Aug 2014 Poolman MG, Miguet L, Sweetlove LJ, Fell DA 2009 A genome scale metabolic model of Arabidopsis and some of its properties. Plant Physiol 151 1570 1581 Potato Genome Sequencing Consortium 2011 Genome sequence and analysis of the tuber crop potato. Nature475 189 195Privalle LS, Chen J, Clapper G, Hunst P, Spiegelhalter F, Zhong CX 2012 Development of an agricultural biotechnology crop product testing from discovery to commercialization.J Agric Food Chem 60 10179 10187 Quanbeck SM, Brachova L, Campbell AA, Guan X, Perera A, He K, Rhee SY, Preeti Bais P, Dickerson JA, Dixon P,Wohlgemuth G, Fiehn O, Barkan L, Lange I, Lange BM,Lee I, Cortes D, Salazar C, Shuman J, Shulaev V, Huhman DV, Sumner LW, Roth MR, Welti R, Ilarslan H, Wurtele ES, Nikolau BJ 2012 Metabolomics as a hypothesis generating functional genomics tool for the annotation ofArabidopsis thaliana genes of unknown function . Front Plant Sci 3 1 12 Randall RP 2012 A global compendium of weeds, 2nd edn. Department of Agriculture and Food, Western Australia,Perth Rauch A, Wieczorek D, Graf E, Wieland T, Endele S, Schwarzmayr T, Albrecht B, Bartholdi D, Beygo J, DiDonato N, Dufke A, Cremer K, Hempel M, Horn D, Hoyer J, Joset P, Ro pke A, Moog U, Riess A, Thiel CT, Tzschach A, Wiesener A, Wohlleber E, Zweier C, Ekici AB, ZinkAM, Rump A, Meisinger C, Grallert H, Sticht H, SchenckA, Engels H, Rappold G, Schro ck E, Wieacker P, Riess O, Meitinger T, Reis A, Strom TM 2012 Range of genetic mutations associated with severe non syndromic sporadicintellectual disability an exome sequencing study. Lancet380 1674 1682 Raybould A 2011 The bucket and the searchlight formulating and testing risk hypotheses about the weediness andinvasiveness potential of transgenic crops. Environ Biosaf Res 9 123 133 Raybould A, Stacey D, Vlachos D, Graser G, Li X, Joseph R 2007 Non target organism risk assessment of MIR604maize expressing mCry3A for control of corn rootworm. J Appl Entomol 131 391 399 Risk JM, Selter LL, Chauhan H, Krattinger SG, Kumlehn J, Hensel G, Viccars LA, Richardson TM, Buesing G, TrollerA, Lagudah ES, Keller B 2013 The wheat Lr34 gene provides resistance against multiple fungal pathogens in barley. Plant Biotechnol J 11 847 854 Romeis J, Bartsch D, Bigler F, Candolﬁ MP, Gielkens MMC, Hartley SE, Hellmich RL, Huesing JE, Jepson PC, Layton R, Quemada H, Raybould A, Rose RI, Schiemann J, Sears MK, Shelton AM, Sweet J, Vaituzis Z, Wolt JD 2008 Assessment of risk of insect resistant transgenic crops to nontarget arthropods. Nat Biotechnol 26 203 208 Romeis J, Hellmich RL, Candolﬁ MP, Carstens K, De Schrijver A, Gatehouse AMR, Herman RA, Huesing JE, McLeanMA, Raybould A, Shelton AM, Waggoner A 2011 Recommendations for the design of laboratory studies on non target arthropods for risk assessment of genetically engineered plants. Transgenic Res 20 1 22 Romeis J, McLean MA, Shelton AM 2013 When bad science makes good headlines Bt maize and regulatory bans. Nat Biotechnol 31 386 387 Saha R, Suthers PF, Maranas CD 2011 Zea mays i RS1563 a comprehensive genome scale metabolic reconstruction of maize metabolism. PLoS One 6 7 e21784 Sammons B, Whitsel J, Stork LAG, Reeves W, Horak M 2014 Characterization of drought tolerant maize MON 87460Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 601 123for use in environmental risk assessment. Crop Sci 54 719 729 Sancho AI, Foxall R, Browne T, Dey R, Zuidmeer L, Marzban G, Waldron KW, van Ree R, Hoffmann Sommergruber K, Laimer M, Mills EN 2006a Effect of postharvest storage on the expression of the apple allergen Mal d 1. J AgricFood Chem 54 5917 5923 Sancho AI, Foxall R, Rigby NM, Browne T, Zuidmeer L, van Ree R, Waldron KW, Mills EN 2006b Maturity and storage inﬂuence on the apple Malus domestica allergen Mal d 3, a nonspeciﬁc lipid transfer protein. J Agric FoodChem 54 5098 5104 Sanvido O, Romeis J, Gathmann A, Gielkens M, Raybould A, Bigler F 2012 Evaluating environmental risks of ge netically modiﬁed crops ecological harm criteria forregulatory decision making. Environ Sci Policy 15 82 91 Sarevitz D 2004 How science makes environmental contro versies worse. Environ Sci Policy 7 385 403 SCBD 2000 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Conven tion on Biological Diversity annex III, risk assessment. Montreal, Canada. http bch.cbd.int protocol text . Ac cessed 14 Jan 2015 Schiessl S, Samans B, Hu ttel B, Reinhardt R, Snowdon RJ 2014 Capturing sequence variation among ﬂowering time regulatory gene homologs in the allopolyploid cropspecies Brassica napus . Front Plant Sci. doi 10.3389 fpls. 2014.00404 Schnell J, Steele M, Bean J, Neuspiel M, Girard C, Dormann N, Pearson C, Savoie A, Bourbonnie re L, Macdonald P 2015 A comparative analysis of insertional effects in genetically engineered plants considerations for pre market assess ments. Transgenic Res 24 1 17. doi 10.1007 s11248 014 9843 7 Schwender J 2008 Metabolic ﬂux analysis as a tool in metabolic engineering of plants. Curr Opin Biotechnol 19 131 137 Segre D, Vitkup D, Church GM 2002 Analysis of optimality in natural and perturbed metabolic networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 15112 15117 Shlomi T, Berkman O, Ruppin E 2005 Regulatory on off minimization of metabolic ﬂux changes after geneticperturbations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 7695 7700 Staginnus C, Gregor W, Mette MF, Teo CH, Borroto Ferna ndez EG, Laimer da Ca ˆmara Machado M, Matzke M, Sch warzacher T 2007 Endogenous pararetroviral sequences in tomato Solanum lycopersicum and related species. BMC Plant Biol 7 24 Steiner HY, Halpin C, Jez JM, Kough J, Parrott W, Underhill L, Weber N, Hannah LC 2013 Evaluating the potential for adverse interactions within genetically engineered breed ing stacks. Plant Physiol 161 1587 1594 Stone LM, Byrne M 2011 Comparing the outputs of ﬁve weed risk assessment models implemented in Australia are there consistencies across models? Plant Prot Q 26 29 35 Sweetlove LJ, Fell D, Fernie AR 2008 Getting to grips with the plant metabolic network. Biochem J 409 27 41 Tanaka H 2010 Omics based medicine and systems pathology a new perspective for personalized and predictive medi cine. Methods Inf Med 49 173 185 Tenaillon MI, Sawkins MC, Long AD, Gaut RL, Doebley JF, Gaut BS 2001 Patterns of DNA sequence polymorphismalong chromosome 1 of maize Zea mays ssp. mays L. . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98 9161 9166 Tepfer M, Racovita M, Craig W 2013 Putting problem formulation at the forefront of GMO risk analysis. GM Crops Food 4 10 15 Thiele I, Palsson BØ 2010 A protocol for generating a high quality genome scale metabolic reconstruction. Nat Protoc5 93 121 Tian Z, Zhao M, She M, Du J, Cannon SB, Liu X, Xu X, Qi X, Li MW, Lam HM, Ma J 2012 Genome wide characteriza tion of nonreference transposons reveals evolutionarypropensities of transposons in soybean. Plant Cell 24 4422 4436 Tollenaar M, Lee EA 2010 Strategies for enhancing grain yield in maize. In Janick J ed Plant breeding reviews, vol34. Wiley, Hoboken Urbanczyk Wochniak E, Sumner LW 2007 MedicCyc a biochemical pathway database for Medicago truncatula . Bioinformatics 23 1418 1423 van Dijk JP, Leifert C, Barros E, Kok EJ 2010 Gene expression proﬁling for food safety assessment examples in potatoand maize. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 58 S21 S25 van Dijk JP, Cankar K, Hendriksen PJM, Beenen HG, Zhu M, Scheffer S, Shepherd LVT, Stewart D, Davies HV, Leifert C, Wilkockson SJ, Gruden K, Kok EJ 2012 Theidentiﬁcation and interpretation of differences in thetranscriptomes of organically and conventionally grown potato tubers. J Agric Food Chem 60 2090 2101 van Dijk JP, de Mello CS, Voorhuijzen MM, Hutten RCB, Arisi ACM, Jansen JJ, Buydens LMC, van der Voet H, Kok EJ 2014 Safety assessment of plant varieties using tran scriptomics proﬁling and a one class classiﬁer. RegulToxicol Pharmacol 70 297 303 Vaughn JN, Bennetzen JL 2014 Natural insertions in rice commonly form tandem duplications indicative of patch mediated double strand break induction and repair. ProcNatl Acad Sci USA 111 6684 6689. doi 10.1073 pnas. 1321854111 Virtue JG, Spencer JE, Weiss JE, Reichard SE 2008 Australia s Botanic Gardens weed risk assessment proce dure. Plant Prot Q 23 166 178 Vu GT, Cao HX, Watanabe K, Hensel G, Blattner FR, Kumlehn J, Schubert I 2014 Repair of site speciﬁc DNA double strand breaks in barley occurs via diverse pathwaysprimarily involving the sister chromatid. Plant Cell 26 2156 2167 Weber N, Halpin C, Hannah LC, Jez J, Kough J, Parrott W 2012 Crop genome plasticity and its relevance to foodand feed safety of genetically engineered breeding stacks. Plant Physiol 160 1842 1853 Wolt JD, Keese P, Raybould A, Fitzpatrick JW, Burachik M, Gray A, Olin SS, Schiemann J, Sears M, Wu F 2010 Problem formulation in the environmental risk assessment for genetically modiﬁed plants. Transgenic Res 19 425 436 Youens Clark K, Buckler E, Casstevens T, Chen C, Declerck G, Derwent P, Dharmawardhana P, Jaiswal P, Kersey P, Karthikeyan AS, Lu J, McCouch SR, Ren L, Spooner W,Stein JC, Thomason J, Wei S, Ware D 2011 Gramenedatabase in 2010 updates and extensions. Nucleic Acids Res 39 Database issue D1085 D1094602 Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 123Zhang P, Dreher K, Karthikeyan A, Chi A, Pujar A, Caspi R, Karp P, Kirkup V, Latendresse M, Lee C, Mueller LA, Muller R, Rhee SY 2010 Creation of a genome wide metabolicpathway database for Populus trichocarpa using a new approach for reconstruction and curation of metabolic pathways for plants. Plant Physiol 153 1479 1491Zuidmeer L, Goldhahn K, Rona RJ, Gislason D, Madsen C, Summers C, Sodergren E, Dahlstrom J, Lindner T, Sigurdardottir ST, McBride D, Keil T 2008 The preva lence of plant food allergies a systematic review. J Allergy Clin Immunol 121 1210 1218Transgenic Res 2015 24 587 603 603 123